---
layout: single
title: Chapter 3

mathjax: true
author_profile: false

categories:
   - Machine Learning
   - ISLR

---

{% include toc title="Contents" %}

# Introduction

Linear regression is a very simple approach for supervised learning. It is a useful tool for predicting a quantitative response. Using the Advertising data, we can ask the following questions to the data for a better market plan - 

1. **Is there a relationship between advertising and sales?**<br>
    If there is not, one can argue that there is no need to invest in advertising.

2. **How strong is the relationship between advertising budget and sales?**<br>
    Assuming there is a relationship between sales and advertising, we would also like to know the strength of this relationship.

3. **How large is the association between each medium and sales?**<br>
    For every dollar spent on advertising in a particular medium, by what amount does sales increase?
    
4. **How accurately can we predict future sales?**<br>
    The performance metrics used for our model.

5. **Is the relationship linear?**<br>
    If it is not linear, linear regression might not be a good tool. We can still use it but with some transformations.

6. **Is there synergy among the advertising media?**<br>
    Perhaps distributing the budget among the mediums may result in better sales rather than focusing on 1 area completely.


# Simple Linear Regression
## Introduction

> Straightforward approach for  predicting a quantitative response $Y$ on the basis of a single predictor variable $X$. It assumes a linear relationship between the predictor $X$ and the response $Y$. Can be written as:

$$\begin{equation}
Y \approx \beta_0 + \beta_1X
\tag{1}
\end{equation}$$

$\approx$ can be referred as "is approximately modelled as". This equation is often described as the "process of regressing $Y$ on $X$ or $Y$ onto $X$".

In equation $(1)$, $\beta_0$ and $\beta_1$ are known as the intercept and slope terms in the linear model. Together they are known as the model coefficients or model parameters. We can use our training data to estimate these parameters. Using these parameters, we can predict values of the response variable by:

$$\begin{equation}
\hat y = \hat\beta_0 + \hat\beta_1x
\tag{2}
\end{equation}$$

where, $\hat{}$   denotes the estimated/predicted value of a parameter or variable.

## Estimating the Coefficients

We must use the training data to estimate the coefficients. Let $$\left\{(x_i, y_i): i \in (1,\dots N)\right\}$$ be our training data consisting of $N$ training samples. Our goal is to obtain that coefficients $\beta_0$ and $\beta_1$ such that the linear model $(1)$ fits the well. In other words, we want to find the coefficients such that the resulting line is as close as possible to the $N$ data points. We will use the least squares method to minimize the closeness of the line and the points.

Let $\hat y_i = \hat\beta_0 + \hat\beta_1x$ be the prediction for $Y$ based on the $i^{th}$ value of $X$. Then $e_i = y_i - \hat y_i$ represents the $i^{th}$ residual - the difference between the $i^{th}$ observed response value and the $i^{th}$ response value predicted by our model. We can  then define residual sum of squares (RSS) as:

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{RSS} &= e_1^2 + e_2^2 + \dots + e_N^2 \\
&= (y_1 - \hat\beta_0 - \hat\beta_1x_1)^2 + (y_2 - \hat\beta_0 - \hat\beta_1x_2)^2 + \dots + (y_N - \hat\beta_0 - \hat\beta_1x_N)^2
\end{align*}
\tag{3}
$$

We now need to choose $\beta_0$ and $\beta_1$ such that $(3)$ is minimised. Using calculus, we can see that the optimum values of $\beta_0$ and $\beta_1$ are:

$$
\begin{align*}
&\hat\beta_1 = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^n(x_i-\bar x)(y_i - \bar y)}{\sum_{i=1}^n(x - \bar x)^2} \\
&\hat\beta_0 = \bar y - \hat\beta_1\bar x
\end{align*}
\tag{4}
$$
 

$\bar y \equiv \frac 1 n\sum_{i=1}^ny_i$ and $\bar x \equiv \frac 1 n\sum_{i=1}^nx_i$ are the means of the 2 variables. $(4)$ defines the least square estimates for simple linear regression.

## Assessing the Accuracy of Estimates

We always have a error term irrespective that is known as the irreducible error. Therefore we need to estimate our linear model as 

$$\begin{equation}
Y = \beta_0 + \beta_1X + \epsilon
\tag{5}
\end{equation}$$

$\beta_0$ is the intercept, $\beta_1$ is the slope and $\epsilon$  is the catch-all for what we miss with this simple mode - the relationship is probably not linear or we may not have all the information needed to build a good model.

The model given by $(5)$ defines the population regression line. The least squares method gives us the best linear approximation of the true relationship between $X$ and $Y$, that is the population regression line. This estimate of the true relationship is biased, based on how the data is sampled. We get data from multiple samples and average the coefficients to reduce this bias.

Let's take the example of estimating the population mean using a given sample of data. We can estimate how far-off the sample mean will be from the population mean using the standard error: 

$$\begin{equation}
\text{Var}(\hat\mu) = \text{SE}(\hat\mu)^2 = \frac {\sigma^2} n
\tag{6}
\end{equation}$$

 Where $\sigma$ is the standard deviation of each of the realisations of $y_i$ of $Y$. This formula holds provided that the $n$ observations are uncorrelated. This equation also tells us that the more data we have, the less standard error.

To compute the standard errors associated with $\beta_0$ and $\beta_1$, we use the following formulas: 

$$
\begin{align}
\text{SE}(\hat\beta_0)^2 &= \sigma^2\left[\frac 1 n + \frac{\bar x^2}{\sum+{i=1}^n(x_1 - \bar x)^2}\right],\\
\text{SE}(\hat\beta_1)^2 &= \sigma^2\frac{\sigma^2}{\sum+{i=1}^n(x_1 - \bar x)^2}
\end{align}
\tag{7}
$$

where $\sigma^2 = \text{Var}(\epsilon)$. We can estimate $\sigma^2$ using the RSS. This is known as the residual standard error, and is given by: 

$$\text{RSE} = \sqrt{\frac{\text{RSS}}{n-2}}$$

The standard error can be used to determine the confidence intervals. A 95% confidence interval is defined as a range of values such that with 95% probability , the range will contain the true unknown value of the parameter. 

For linear regression, the 95% confidence level approximately takes the form: 

$$\begin{equation}
\hat\beta_i \pm  2\text{SE}(\hat\beta_i)
\tag{8}
\end{equation}$$

This means that the interval has a 95% chance of containing the true value of $\hat\beta_i$: 

$$\begin{equation}
\left[\hat\beta_i -  2\text{SE}(\hat\beta_i), \hat\beta_i +  2\text{SE}(\hat\beta_i)\right]
\tag{9}
\end{equation}$$

**Note:** 
This is an approximation. We assume that the errors are Gaussian. Also the factor of 2 slightly varies according to the number of samples in the linear regression.

Standard errors can also be used to perform hypothesis tests on the coefficients. The most common hypothesis test involves testing 

### Null Hypothesis

$H_0$: There is no relationship between $X$ and $Y$.

$$H_0\: : \: \beta_1 = 0$$

### Alternative Hypothesis

$H_a$: There is some relationship between $X$ and $Y$.

$$H_a \: : \: \beta_1 \neq 0$$

To test the null hypothesis, we need to determine whether $\hat\beta_1$, our estimate for $\beta_1$ is sufficiently far from zero that we can be confident that $\beta_1$ is non-zero. 

**Intuition**: 
If $\text{SE}(\hat\beta_1)$ is small, then even relatively small values can provide strong evidence that $\beta_1 = 0$. In contrast, if $\text{SE}(\hat\beta_1)$ is large, then $\hat\beta_1$ must be large in absolute value in order for us to reject the null hypothesis.

In practice we compute the $t$-statistic which measures the number of standard deviation s that $\hat\beta_1$ is away from 0. 

$$\begin{equation}
t = \frac {\hat\beta_1 - 0} {\text{SE}(\hat\beta_1)}
\tag{10}
\end{equation}$$

If there is no relationship, then we expect that $(10)$ will have a $t$-distribution with $n-2$ degrees of freedom. 

Consequently it is a matter of computing the probability that we observe any number equal to $|t|$ or larger in absolute value, assuming $\beta_1 = 0$. This probability is known as the $p$-value. We can interpret the $p$-value as follows: <br><br>
A small $p$-value indicates that it is unlikely to observe such a substantial association between the 2 variables due to chance, in the absence of any real association. Hence when we see a small $p$-value, we can infer that there is a relationship between the 2 variables and reject the null hypothesis. Typical $p$-values cutoffs for rejecting the null hypothesis are 5% or 1%.

## Assessing the Accuracy of the Model

Once we have rejected the null hypothesis, we will then try to quantify the extent to which the model fits the data. We do this using 2 related quantities: Residual Standard Error (RSE) and $R^2$ statistic. 

### Residual Standard Error:

The RSE is an estimate of the standard deviation of $\epsilon$. Roughly speaking, it is the average amount that the response will deviate from the true regression line. It is computed using - 

$$\begin{equation}
\text{RSE} = \sqrt{\frac 1 {n-2}\text{RSS}} = \sqrt{\frac 1 {n-2}\sum_{i=1}^n\left(y_i - \hat y_i\right)^2}
\tag{11}
\end{equation}$$

The RSE is considered a measure of the lack of fit of the model to the data. Smaller RSE ⇒ Better fit.

### $R^2$ Statistic

It is not always clear what constitutes a good RSE depending on the context of the problem and the scale of $Y$. The $R^2$ statistic takes the form of a proportion - The proportion of variance explained. It always takes on a value between 0 to 1, and is independent of the scale of $Y$. To calculate $R^2$ we use the formula: 

$$\begin{equation}
R^2 = \frac{\text{TSS}-\text{RSS}}{\text{TSS}} = 1 - \frac{\text{RSS}}{ \text{TSS}}
\tag{12}
\end{equation}$$

where TSS is the Total Sum of Squares. This measures the total variance in $Y$ and can be thought of as the amount of variability inherent in $Y$ before the regression is performed. TSS is given by - $\text{TSS} = \sum_{i=1}^n\left(y_i - \bar y\right)^2$

Therefore $\text{TSS}-\text{RSS}$ measures the amount of variability in the response or $Y$ that is explained by performing regression, and $R^2$ measures the the proportion of variability in $Y$ that can be explained using $X$. $R^2 \approx 1$ ⇒ That the model is a good fit and vice versa.

**Note:**
The $R^2$ statistic and correlation are quite similar and can be interchanged in the context of simple linear regression. $R^2$ statistic is however much more useful in the setting of multiple linear regression which is a much more real-world scenario.